The United Empire of Men, also referred to as the Empire, or the Empire of Men, is the second largest nation in Is and the apex influence over North Aftea. A theocracy, the empire is ruled by a figure known as the Sight, who is served by a council of Ears, or holy counsellors. The Empire was formed in the 273rd year of the third age, as rising tides swallowed the old lowlands, forcing all peoples there to the highlands known as the Reach. There, small city states formed and warred with one another for a time, until eventually being conquered by the First Emperor, Septus the Spear. Originally a secular state, the Emperate was converted to the Faith In The Light after the arrival of Heaoun the Professed in 3E 302. A charismatic man, Heaoun was a talented speaker able to reach into the hearts of people from all walks of life. His defining feature was his hands, which were described to shine with brilliant light. Heaoun eventually won the ear of an ageing Septus, who in his last days converted to the Faith. However, it wasn't until 3E 341, nearly forty years later, that the Faith was adopted as the official religion of the Emperate.

The current seat of the Empire is in Holy Septus (previously Septus). In the year 3E 797, construction began on Babel, a colossal tower-city in the mountains to house the nobility of the Emperate. However, construction the tower halted in 4E 53, 57 years later, and the tower stood incomplete for nearly a century. The process of continuing the construction of the city began once more in the year 4E 155, but was quickly halted by the aggression of Isanmaame against the Emperate.

The Light's Covenant: The Light's Covenant is an organization ran by the Emperate in which orphaned children are taken off the streets of Holy Septus and raised and trained in the divine arts. Boys are trained to be warriors of Hathios while girls are trained in the ways of the Priestess. These "Soldiers of Light" are then incorporated into the ranks of the Empire's vast legions.